Docs/hibernation (#364)
partykit/partykit: apps/docs/src/content/docs/guides/scaling-partykit-servers-with-hibernation.mdx

---
title: Scaling PartyKit servers with Hibernation
description: Hibernation API is a pathway for scaling your app to tens of thousands of connections as it offloads the memory burden from the party instance process to the PartyKit platform.
---

import { Tabs, TabItem } from "@astrojs/starlight/components";

PartyKit simplifies building realtime multiplayer applications. However, as your app grows, maintaining WebSocket connections requires a lot of memory. Hibernation API is a pathway for scaling your app to tens of thousands of connections. It is done by offloading the memory burden from the party instance process to the PartyKit platform.

This page provides an overview of the Hibernation API - what it is, how it works, when it’s useful, and how to implement it.

## Opting into Hibernation

```ts
export default class Server implements Party.Server {
  options: Party.ServerOptions = {
    hibernate: true,
  };
}
```

## Benefits

Hibernation allows a single party instance to handle vastly more active connections than it otherwise would:

- Without Hibernation: up to **100 connections** per party instance
- With Hibernation: up to **32,000 connections** per party instance

> The number of working connections may vary depending on the performance characteristics of the code you run on PartyKit (for example, memory use or CPU time). In PartyKit apps, memory use depends on:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that even with Hibernation, the practical maximum amount of connections may vary depending on the performance characteristics of the code you run on PartyKit (for example, memory use or CPU time). In PartyKit apps, memory use depends on:
```

- active connections,
- code size - for example, third-party libraries,
- state - class fields you keep in memory between requests,
- dynamic allocations - memory used by JavaScript for local variables, execution stack, and others.

> 

Reviewer: I'd add here something like "With Hibernation, the active WebSocket connections no longer count towards your party's 128MB memory limit, but the total memory footprint of your code, state and dynamic allocations may still exceed that limit."

Author: Thank you!

- if you're building with `Yjs` as `y-partykit` doesn't currently support Hibernation. (We are working on this.)

## Limitations

While using Hibernation, please note that:

- Attaching event handlers manually in `onConnect` will not work. As soon as the party hibernates, these handlers are lost. Use `onMessage` and `onClose` instead.
- The local `partykit dev` development environment does not hibernate. This means the behaviour of the code while developing can be different from behaviour on the hosted platform. (We are working on this.)

To better understand the limitations, check [the Cloudflare documentation](https://developers.cloudflare.com/durable-objects/platform/limits/).

## Patterns

Hibernation will work better with certain programming patterns.

### Partial state loading

Instead of loading the full state from storage in the `onStart` lifecycle method, only read from storage the data you need, and only when you need it. Additionally, store state under multiple keys instead of one.

If your party instance requires state, you will need to persist it to party storage, an external database, or an API, and reload it when the party is woken up from hibernation.

> :::tip[PartyKit `storage`]

Reviewer: I think the `:::` callouts don't support backtick code, so this renders just as "PartyKit"
```suggestion
:::tip[PartyKit storage]
```

The PartyKit `storage` API has its own built-in cache. Because of that, reading frequently the same key is very performant as the result is cached in memory instead of having to read it from disk every time.
:::

If loading the state is expensive (for example, because of the large amounts of state stored in party storage or a slow API call), message handling may be slower, as the party will have to wait for the state to load before running in the `onMessage` callback.

#### Example

<Tabs>
	<TabItem label="✅ DO">
```ts
type AllItems = Record<string, any>;

export default class Server implements Party.Server {
  options: Party.ServerOptions = { hibernate: true };
  constructor(readonly party: Party.Party) {}
  // GOOD: no data loading on startup
  // onStart() {}

> async onMessage(websocketMessage: string) {

Reviewer: The code indentation in this code block looks a little off?

      const updatedItem = {
        ...item,
        ...event.data,
      };

      // GOOD: now we need to write only to a single key
      this.party.storage.put(`item:${event.id}`, updatedItem);
    };

};
};

````
</TabItem>
<TabItem label="⛔️ DON'T">
```ts
type AllItems = Record<string, any>;

export default class Server implements Party.Server {
  options: Party.ServerOptions = { hibernate: true };
  constructor(readonly party: Party.Party) {}
  async onStart() {
    // BAD
    // we load full state from storage on start (may be big)
    this.items = await this.party.storage.get<AllItems>("state");
  };

  async onMessage(websocketMessage: string) {
    const event = JSON.parse(websocketMessage);
    if (event.type === "create") {
      this.items[event.id] = event.data;
      this.party.broadcast(event.data);
    };

    if (event.type === "update") {
      const item = this.items[event.id];
      this.items[event.id] = {
        ...item,
        ...event.data,
      };
    };

    // BAD
    // we need to persist the whole state again (expensive)
    await this.party.storage.put("items", this.items);
  };
};

> ````

Reviewer: One too many backticks here (should be 3). Can't do a suggestion, because GitHub uses triple backtick as the suggestion format 😂

Author: I noticed that Prettier inserts an additional backtick and messes up indentation in .md 😭 Thank you.
